KMaP tile pipeline redesign plan
Date: 2026-10-05
Status: Proposed architecture and implementation plan for review.

Purpose

Replace the orchestration spread across CanvasKernel, CanvasEngine and
TileRenderer with one CanvasEngine that owns canvas configuration, tile
selection, fetching, processing, caching, publication and lifecycle.

Keep three explicit stages:

1. Fetch tile payloads using structured coroutines and asynchronous IO.
2. Decode and prepare vector tiles using actual parallel workers. Use Web
   Workers for browser targets and a bounded thread executor on other targets.
3. Draw with the existing Compose renderer. Preserve its current behavior and
   defer replacement of the drawing backend.

The first implementation must demonstrate that expensive vector preparation
executes outside the browser UI thread. A successful build or a dispatcher
switch alone does not demonstrate this.

This document plans the work. It does not authorize a commit, publication or
replacement of the renderer.


1. Current implementation and constraints

Relevant files, relative to the project root:

  KMaP/src/com/rafambn/kmap/source/internal/CanvasKernel.kt
  KMaP/src/com/rafambn/kmap/source/internal/CanvasEngine.kt
  KMaP/src/com/rafambn/kmap/source/internal/TileRenderer.kt
  KMaP/src/com/rafambn/kmap/source/internal/VectorTileProcessing.kt
  KMaP/src/com/rafambn/kmap/source/internal/OptimizedVectorTile.kt
  KMaP/src/com/rafambn/kmap/mvttile/OptimizedMVTile.kt
  KMaP/src/com/rafambn/kmap/source/internal/render/VectorTileCanvas.kt
  KMaP/src/com/rafambn/kmap/style/compiled/CompiledStyle.kt
  KMaP/src/com/rafambn/kmap/style/compiled/CompiledValue.kt
  KMaP/src/com/rafambn/kmap/components/parameters/VectorCanvasParameters.kt
  KMaP/src/com/rafambn/kmap/components/KMaPContent.kt
  KMaP/src/com/rafambn/kmap/MapState.kt
  DemoApp/shared/src/com/rafambn/kmap/source/VectorTileSource.kt
  DemoApp/jsApp/package-js-browser.sh

Current responsibilities:

- CanvasKernel resolves visible tiles and creates a separate engine, renderer
  and child Job for each canvas ID.
- CanvasEngine consumes selections and renderer results in one coroutine. It
  owns active tiles, cache contents, fallback selection and normalization of
  repeated tile coordinates.
- TileRenderer launches a coroutine for each new required tile. The same
  dispatcher runs coordination, fetching and processing. It deduplicates
  in-flight requests but has no explicit admission limit for tile jobs.
- Conflated request channels replace pending selections. Work that has already
  started continues, and completed results use unlimited channels.
- CanvasKernel only creates entries for previously unseen IDs. Replacing a
  source, style or cache setting under an existing ID needs explicit handling.

The three intended stages do not yet match the code boundaries:

- The demo VectorTileSource downloads bytes, decodes protobuf and parses MVT
  geometry before returning VectorTile. Its current getTile operation therefore
  includes CPU work that should move to stage 2.
- optimizeMVTile evaluates filters, assigns features to style layers and builds
  Compose Path objects. OptimizedMVTile is not a portable worker payload.
- CompiledValue and CompiledFilter contain evaluator functions. CompiledStyle
  also contains sprite and font resources. These objects cannot be treated as
  browser message data.
- VectorTileCanvas evaluates paint and layout properties, measures text and
  performs path transformations during drawing. These costs remain while the
  drawing implementation stays unchanged.
- Geometry construction currently occurs inside the style-layer loop. A feature
  referenced by several style layers can produce repeated geometry objects.

Preserve these existing rules:

- Canvas IDs are unique.
- Source requests use normalized coordinates. Display copies preserve their
  own coordinates for world repetition and fallback placement.
- Parent and child fallback tiles remain visible while replacements load.
- Failed tiles do not remove successful neighbors or useful fallbacks.
- Removing a canvas cancels its work without cancelling the caller's scope.
- Late results never restore an obsolete viewport selection.
- Tile sources report outcomes through TileResult.
- Coordinate conversions continue to use the reference types from
  MapReferenceUtils.kt. Preserve zoom, rotation, density and border behavior.
- Keep iosX64 disabled. Verify iOS using supported Apple Silicon targets.

The existing instruction that vector work is paused pending Compose async
measurement/drawing support remains relevant. This redesign isolates portable
preparation; it does not assume that Compose drawing or text measurement has
become safe to move to workers.


2. Alternatives and recommendation

Alternative A: One coordinator with independent tile jobs

CanvasEngine owns scheduling, caches and visible state. Each worker receives a
tile payload and a style revision, prepares the tile and returns portable data.
Workers may retain compiled style definitions, but do not initially own a
persistent decoded-tile cache.

Benefits:
- One place decides which work matters and when it may start.
- Any available worker can process a tile.
- Worker replacement and failure recovery are relatively simple.
- Main-thread and worker responsibilities can be verified independently.

Costs:
- Restyling can repeat decoding unless raw or decoded data is retained.
- Output conversion and Compose Path construction still cost main-thread time.
- Browser transport requires explicit encoding and buffer ownership.

Recommendation: Start with this design. It meets the current requirements with
the fewest distributed ownership decisions.

Alternative B: One coordinator with workers that retain decoded tiles

Workers own decoded geometry for assigned tiles. CanvasEngine sends prepare,
restyle and release commands, and routes follow-up work to the worker holding
the tile.

Benefits:
- Frequent style changes can reuse decoded geometry.
- Fewer repeated input transfers and decodes.

Costs:
- Requires tile affinity, worker cache budgets and explicit eviction.
- A failed worker loses its tile cache.
- Load balancing becomes harder when expensive tiles concentrate on one worker.
- Removing styles and canvases requires releasing retained worker state.

Adopt this only if measurements show repeated decoding or transfer dominates
the workloads the library needs to support.

Alternative C: A background engine owns selection, fetching and preparation

The browser UI sends viewport/configuration messages to a background engine and
receives prepared tile snapshots. A further worker pool may parallelize CPU
processing. Compose drawing still runs on the UI thread.

Benefits:
- Moves more coordination and cache work away from the UI thread.
- Could fit a later background rendering or command-recording backend.

Costs:
- Custom source lambdas cannot simply cross into a browser worker.
- More configuration, state and resource changes cross the message boundary.
- A single background engine still needs additional execution capacity for
  parallel CPU jobs.
- Larger migration with less direct benefit to the current Compose renderer.

Defer this option until there is evidence that coordination itself is expensive
or a future renderer requires this ownership model.


3. Recommended ownership model

Use one CanvasEngine per map. It replaces the orchestration roles of all three
current classes and contains per-canvas data records.

CanvasEngine owns:

- Canvas registration, configuration changes and removal.
- The latest resolved viewport selection.
- Normalized tile demand and display-coordinate mappings.
- Fetch and processing queues, priorities and admission limits.
- In-flight request tracking and request IDs.
- Source/style revisions and canvas generations.
- Tile caches, active tiles and fallback selection.
- Failure handling and retry scheduling.
- Worker creation, readiness, replacement and disposal.
- Publication of results for the existing Compose drawing code.

Keep this mutable state confined to one owner, normally the map's UI scope.
Coroutine fetch completions and worker callbacks enqueue small results for that
owner to handle. Workers never mutate Compose state or the engine's maps.

The engine may use a private coroutine event loop for coordination. Coroutines
are still appropriate for IO, waiting and lifecycle. The worker implementation
provides the actual CPU execution guarantee.

Do not process geometry or large result conversions inside the coordination
loop without accounting for their main-thread cost. Keep state updates small
and allow drawing to proceed between batches of completed tiles.

Supporting code still exists where it expresses a real boundary:

- Pure functions for tile decoding, style filtering and geometry preparation.
- Immutable command/result data.
- A platform worker implementation with real threads or Web Workers.
- A conversion function that creates existing Compose tile objects.

There is no need for a generic event bus, generic remote-function executor or
another manager that forwards calls between these pieces. Each top-level type
should have its own file, following the project's Kotlin style.

Keep platform execution details behind the worker boundary. Common processing
code stays in common source; platform code follows the repository's source-set
layout. A separate processing module is justified if it is needed to emit a
browser worker without bringing in the Compose application.


4. Data flow and public integration

Viewport/configuration
        |
        v
   CanvasEngine ---- fetch request ----> coroutine source
        ^                                     |
        |-------------- encoded tile ---------|
        |
        |-------- prepare command ------> worker pool
        ^                                     |
        |------------ prepared data ----------|
        |
        v
   Compose object creation -> ActiveTiles -> existing drawing

Keep the integration small:

- MapState owns the engine as an ordinary property.
- KMaPContent supplies canvas configuration and reads each canvas's ActiveTiles.
- Viewport updates submit the latest selection.
- Raster results bypass vector preparation and use their existing drawing path.

Preserve safe same-frame registration. KMaPContent currently refreshes canvases
before looking up active tiles. If configuration becomes asynchronous, drawing
must receive a valid empty snapshot while registration is pending; it must not
call getValue on an entry that the engine has not created yet.

Keep per-canvas observable snapshots so a result for one canvas does not require
unnecessary updates to every canvas. Stable sources, workers and engine objects
remain ordinary properties, not StateFlow values.

A future drawing backend should consume prepared geometry through a separate
conversion path. Do not design a universal GPU command format during this work.


5. Stage 1: fetching

Introduce an encoded vector input path so network retrieval can return bytes
without decoding protobuf or MVT geometry. Continue wrapping source outcomes
in TileResult. Choose the exact encoded tile type after reviewing the existing
public Tile hierarchy and compatibility requirements.

The engine owns the fetch coroutine and passes its encoded result to stage 2.
Use nonblocking HTTP APIs. A dispatcher intended for blocking IO does not make
CPU processing parallel on browser targets.

Do not silently change the meaning of existing VectorTile sources. A source
returning an already decoded MVTile can remain supported through a compatibility
path, but decoding inside that source cannot be moved by the engine. Document
that limitation and migrate the demo to the encoded path.

Arbitrary custom source lambdas stay in the caller's runtime. The engine sends
their resulting data to workers rather than attempting to serialize the lambda.

Use a bounded fetch admission limit shared across the map. Keep pending requests
in the engine instead of launching an unbounded number of suspended jobs.
Throttle further fetch admission when the encoded-payload queue is full.

Preserve coroutine cancellation. Audit source implementations that catch broad
Exception values so cancellation is rethrown rather than converted into an
ordinary failed tile.

Raster sources may also perform image decoding inside getTile. Preserve their
current path for this migration and report raster decoding separately if it
appears in measurements.


6. Stage 2: portable vector preparation

The first worker implementation performs:

- Protobuf decoding.
- MVT geometry decoding.
- Filter evaluation against feature properties and geometry.
- Assignment of features to style layers.
- Preparation of tile-local coordinates, rings and feature metadata.

Output should contain data such as:

- Geometry type and coordinate buffers.
- Ring/part offsets and closure information.
- Feature IDs and typed property values.
- Style-layer membership through references to prepared features.
- The extent needed to interpret each geometry or a documented normalization
  to one extent.

Avoid nested Pair and collection graphs in the transport format where packed
arrays express the same data clearly. Preserve property numeric semantics and
feature ID precision. Do not coerce ULong IDs through a JavaScript Number when
that would lose information.

Build geometry once per source feature. Several style layers should reference
that geometry rather than rebuilding it. Preserve winding, fill rules, feature
order and style-layer draw order.

Keep geometry in tile coordinates. Panning, rotation and density changes should
not rebuild tile-local geometry. Use the existing coordinate reference types at
the map/display boundary.

The portable result must not contain Compose Path, Canvas, Paint, ImageBitmap,
FontFamily, TextMeasurer, coroutine scopes, channels or evaluator closures.

Resource handles and native graphics objects remain owned by the rendering
runtime. The worker result is independent of the lifetime of a graphics context.


7. Style preparation and invalidation

Send a portable style definition to each worker once per style revision. The
worker compiles its own processing evaluators and acknowledges readiness before
accepting jobs that depend on that revision.

Start with the data needed for layer matching and filters. Reuse existing style
models and expression semantics where possible. Introduce a new expression
bytecode format only if a measured need justifies it.

The current public API accepts CompiledStyle. Determine how to retain or supply
the original serializable definition for worker processing. Do not assume a
CompiledStyle built from arbitrary user evaluator functions can be reconstructed
in another browser runtime. Preserve a documented local compatibility path or
require a portable definition for worker-enabled sources.

Keep sprite and font objects on the drawing side. If a preparation expression
depends on resource availability, send the relevant plain metadata and include
its revision in invalidation decisions.

Distinguish preparation dependencies from drawing dependencies:

- Source data, layer mapping and filter changes can require reprocessing.
- A paint-only change should not force a refetch.
- Continuous zoom-dependent paint values stay in the existing renderer for now.
- Layout/filter expressions must preserve their existing evaluation zoom rules.
- Resource availability and locale changes only invalidate work that depends
  on them; the initial implementation may conservatively reprocess if needed.

Do not freeze all style evaluation at a tile's integer zoom. Parent fallback
tiles can be drawn at a different display zoom, and the current renderer uses
both integer and continuous zoom evaluations.

Old style revisions must remain available while accepted jobs still use them,
or those jobs must finish with an explicit obsolete/failure result. Release
unused revisions to avoid retaining every historical style in workers.


8. Worker commands, transport and lifetime

Conceptual commands and replies:

  InstallStyle(styleRevision, portableDefinition)
  StyleReady(styleRevision)
  PrepareTile(requestId, canvasGeneration, sourceRevision,
              normalizedTileKey, styleRevision, payload)
  TilePrepared(requestId, revisions, preparedData)
  TileFailed(requestId, failure)

Add cancellation or release messages only for state the implementation actually
retains. Include a startup readiness/protocol check so incompatible or missing
worker assets produce an explicit failure instead of leaving requests pending.

Use a small domain-specific worker contract. It must support submitting tile
work, receiving terminal replies, observing worker failure and closing real
worker resources. Keep browser serialization inside the browser implementation.

On JVM/native targets, immutable messages may be handed to a thread executor
without encoding them as browser buffers. Ensure submitted arrays are no longer
mutated by the sender. Workers return results to the engine's owner.

For browsers, use transferable ArrayBuffers for substantial binary payloads.
Transferring detaches the sender's buffer. Raw cache policy must therefore choose
one of these explicitly:

- Retain a copy and transfer a separate buffer.
- Transfer ownership and arrange to regain the raw payload if it must be cached.
- Do not retain raw bytes and accept later refetching or another cache source.

Start with the simplest measured policy. Do not describe the pipeline as
zero-copy merely because postMessage uses a transfer list. Kotlin collection
conversion and Kotlin/Wasm interop can still introduce copying and allocation.

Use one bounded pool per map initially, shared by its canvases. Avoid one worker
per tile or per canvas. Consider an application-wide pool later only if multiple
simultaneous maps demonstrate a need for shared resource limits.

On map disposal, cancel fetches, reject new work, ignore later callbacks and
terminate or close the owned workers. Removing one canvas only invalidates that
canvas's work. Do not cancel the parent application scope.


9. Browser and native execution choices

Browser option 1: Kotlin/JS processing worker

Compile the portable processing code to JavaScript and load it in a dedicated
worker. Both JS and Wasm UIs can communicate with that worker through the same
message contract. The UI compilation target does not dictate the worker target.

Browser option 2: Kotlin/Wasm processing worker

Load a separate Kotlin/Wasm processing module in each dedicated worker. Treat
its runtime and objects as separate from the UI runtime. Measure startup,
module loading, memory use and conversions at the JS interop boundary.

Prototype both only as needed to choose a backend. Prefer a shared Kotlin
algorithm over separately maintained JavaScript and Kotlin processing logic.
Do not assume Kotlin/Wasm object references are transferable between workers.

Do not make SharedArrayBuffer or shared Wasm memory a requirement of the first
implementation. Message passing is sufficient to establish the required
execution boundary; shared-memory support and deployment requirements would
need their own investigation.

JVM/Android/iOS:

Use a bounded platform thread executor behind the same worker contract. Keep
graphics and Compose objects out of those tasks even where native APIs might
permit specific graphics operations off-thread. That preserves one processing
contract across platforms.

Coroutines may adapt replies into suspending waits, but submission to a real
executor is the CPU offload mechanism. Select the concrete executor APIs against
the project's supported toolchain before implementation.

Browser packaging is part of the feature:

- Emit a worker entry point that does not initialize the Compose application.
- Package any worker JS/Wasm files and required auxiliary assets.
- Resolve worker/module URLs correctly under a hosted subpath.
- Verify the existing JS packaging script includes the required outputs.
- Verify Wasm packaging separately rather than assuming JS packaging covers it.
- Surface startup, asset loading and worker runtime failures.
- Document required hosting/CSP settings if the selected worker loading method
  introduces any.

A fallback to local processing must be explicit and observable if provided. A
silent fallback would hide failure of the main requirement, browser parallelism.


10. Scheduling, versions and failure behavior

Maintain separate limits for active fetches, pending encoded payloads, active
processing jobs and completed data waiting for Compose conversion. Start with
internal limits and measured defaults; expose configuration only where library
consumers need it.

Use worker availability to admit processing jobs. Keep most pending work in the
engine so a new viewport can replace priorities without messages queued behind
long CPU tasks in workers.

Prioritize currently visible missing tiles. Center-first ordering is a reasonable
initial policy. Preserve useful fallback tiles while replacements are pending.
Do not add speculative prefetching in the first implementation.

Separate these identities:

- Display tile coordinates: where a repeated tile is drawn.
- Source tile key: source identity/revision plus normalized zoom, row and column.
- Prepared tile key: source tile key plus preparation style/dependency revision.
- Request ID: identifies a specific attempt and its terminal completion.
- Canvas generation: prevents a removed and recreated ID from accepting old work.
- Current viewport selection: determines publication, not whether all older
  content has become invalid.

Do not compare callback identity alone to detect source changes. Recomposition
can create new lambda instances without changing the source. Establish stable
configuration identity or an explicit content revision contract.

Handle result ordering deliberately:

- A result from an earlier viewport may populate cache if its content revisions
  remain valid. Publish it only if it contributes to the current selection.
- A result from an old style/source revision cannot replace current content.
- A reply for an old canvas generation cannot revive a removed canvas.
- A late reply from a replaced worker cannot complete a newer retry.
- Every accepted request reaches one terminal state and releases its capacity.

Cancel pending obsolete work before admission. Cancel obsolete fetches when
their results have no remaining demand or deliberate cache use.

CPU cancellation is best effort. A busy browser worker cannot process a queued
cancel message while executing a long synchronous function. Choose between
letting a bounded task finish and discarding its obsolete result, or explicitly
chunking work to allow cancellation messages between chunks. Reserve worker
termination for disposal, failure or a justified recovery policy.

Bound retries and preserve failure visibility. Distinguish source failure,
preparation failure and worker failure internally. Do not retry malformed tiles
forever or discard successful neighboring tiles when one request fails.

After a worker crash, account for its accepted requests, replace the worker if
appropriate, reinstall required styles and retry only eligible current work.


11. Caching and publication

Preserve active-tile and fallback behavior before changing cache policy.

Use separate keys for raw source data and style-dependent prepared data. This
allows a style change to reuse bytes when available without pretending that
previously prepared geometry/filter membership is still valid.

Do not add raw, decoded, prepared and graphics caches simultaneously. Begin with
the existing active/prepared cache semantics and a deliberate raw-byte policy.
Add a persistent decoded cache only if measurements justify Alternative B or
another clearly owned cache.

Tile count alone does not describe memory use for dense vector data. Track
payload and prepared buffer sizes during experiments. Add a byte budget where
tile-count limits fail to keep memory bounded in realistic workloads.

Preserve the existing per-canvas maxCacheTiles setting during migration. Clarify
that active tiles and fallback resources may have lifetimes beyond cache
membership. Cache eviction must not invalidate objects still being drawn.

Cross-canvas source deduplication is optional. It requires an explicit shared
source identity and demand tracking, not an assumption that equal coordinates
or equal URLs always imply interchangeable tile content.

Convert portable geometry to Compose objects once when accepting prepared data,
then reuse those objects for drawing. Preserve the existing OptimizedVectorTile
and ActiveTiles contracts where practical so the renderer does not change.

Measure bursts of completed tiles. If Path construction blocks drawing, limit
conversion work admitted between frames. Parallel workers can finish many tiles
at once and move the bottleneck to main-thread result acceptance.

Continue drawing with the current renderer's global style-layer order, clipping,
fallback scaling, density, symbols, sprites and text measurement behavior.


12. Implementation sequence

Phase 0: Establish a baseline

- Record representative sparse and dense vector tiles and styles.
- Measure the existing remote vector demo on JVM, JS and Wasm.
- Separate fetch wait, protobuf/geometry decoding, filtering, Path creation,
  drawing and text measurement where the existing code allows it.
- Record cold startup, first useful tiles, pan/zoom responsiveness and memory.
- Audit existing tests for normalization, fallbacks, cancellation and retries.

Exit criterion: There is a reproducible baseline and a clear account of which
costs this plan moves and which remain in drawing.

Phase 1: Extract a portable preparation path

- Define encoded vector input and portable prepared geometry.
- Retain a portable style definition alongside the existing rendering style.
- Extract decoder/filter/geometry functions from graphics object construction.
- Add a conversion function producing the existing optimized tile objects.
- Execute this path locally first and verify output parity.
- Preserve decoded-source compatibility and TileResult behavior.

Exit criterion: Existing drawing can consume equivalent results from portable
preparation, with no worker dependency and no renderer replacement.

Phase 2: Prove the browser worker boundary

- Emit and package a minimal real worker using the processing code.
- Install a style, transfer an encoded tile, receive prepared data and draw it.
- Test the path from both JS and Wasm UIs.
- Verify execution location and responsive UI during expensive processing.
- Compare local preparation, one worker and two workers.
- Include transfer, startup and Compose conversion costs in the comparison.

Exit criterion: The existing remote vector demo visibly works through real
workers on both browser targets. The measurements justify continuing, or identify
the boundary that must change before further consolidation.

Phase 3: Consolidate orchestration

- Make one CanvasEngine own the canvas registry and per-canvas state records.
- Move required-tile tracking, fetch admission and worker admission into it.
- Preserve selection normalization, display copies and fallback selection.
- Integrate MapState and KMaPContent with safe registration/publication ordering.
- Handle source/style/cache configuration changes under existing canvas IDs.
- Remove CanvasKernel and TileRenderer once their responsibilities are covered.

Exit criterion: One owner controls pipeline state and lifecycle, existing
behavior tests pass, and removed classes leave no duplicate scheduling path.

Phase 4: Complete execution and lifecycle behavior

- Implement the supported JVM/Android/iOS thread executors.
- Add bounded queues, priorities, revisions, stale-result checks and failure
  recovery to the consolidated owner.
- Handle worker readiness and shutdown, style lifetime and buffer ownership.
- Verify removal, recreation, retries and disposal under delayed completions.

Exit criterion: All supported targets use the intended execution implementation
and maintain bounded, correctly owned work through lifecycle changes.

Phase 5: Measure, tune and document

- Repeat the baseline scenarios with cold and warm workers.
- Tune worker count, fetch limits and conversion admission using measurements.
- Decide whether raw caching or worker-retained decoded tiles pays its cost.
- Update source/API documentation, ownership KDoc and demo usage together.
- Document worker asset packaging and any explicit compatibility fallback.

Exit criterion: Runtime verification, correctness checks and performance evidence
support adopting the new path. Renderer replacement remains a separate task.


13. Verification and acceptance criteria

Build and checks during implementation:

  rtk proxy ./kotlin build -m KMaP -p jvm
  rtk proxy ./kotlin check
  rtk proxy ./DemoApp/jsApp/package-js-browser.sh

Use the repository's supported commands for other target builds and demos after
checking their current configuration. Keep iosX64 disabled. If necessary, use
writable KOTLIN_SHARED_CACHE_DIR, KOTLIN_CLI_BOOTSTRAP_CACHE_DIR and XDG_DATA_HOME
locations outside the repository.

Tests should verify behavior and ownership rather than mirror implementation
details. Extend or adapt the existing CanvasKernelTest, CanvasEngineTest,
TileRendererTest and VectorTileProcessingTest coverage as responsibilities move.

Required correctness cases:

- Repeated world copies fetch/process one normalized tile within their demand
  scope and draw at the correct display coordinates.
- Parent/child fallbacks retain placement, ordering and clipping during loading.
- Panning away and back accepts reusable content without restoring old selection.
- Style changes preserve raw source reuse where configured and reject stale
  prepared results, including replies arriving out of order.
- Source replacement invalidates old source results even at identical z/x/y.
- Removing/recreating a canvas with the same ID rejects the old generation.
- Empty selections stop admitting pending work and handle later replies safely.
- Map disposal closes workers and cancels owned fetches without cancelling the
  caller's scope.
- One tile or worker failure leaves successful neighbors and fallbacks usable.
- Admission limits hold during rapid viewport changes and slow processing.
- Transferred buffers are never read after detachment by their former owner.
- Portable properties and feature IDs survive transport without precision loss.
- Layer filters, geometry-dependent expressions and zoom evaluation retain
  existing semantics.
- Raster behavior remains equivalent.

Runtime and visual checks:

- Open the actual JS and Wasm remote vector demos, including deployment under
  their expected URL subpaths, and confirm that worker assets load.
- Verify CPU preparation is executing in workers rather than a silent local
  fallback.
- Exercise dense tiles while panning, zooming, rotating and changing density.
- Compare style-layer order, transparency, line geometry, fills, sprites, labels,
  clipping, repeated worlds and zoom fallbacks with the baseline.
- Run supported Android/iOS demos and JVM behavior checks for the same pipeline.

Performance acceptance:

- Report end-to-end results, including transfer, conversion and drawing costs.
- Compare main-thread stalls during preparation and viewport interaction.
- Record cold startup separately from steady-state processing.
- Keep queues and retained payloads bounded during sustained movement.
- Check whether additional workers improve responsiveness or merely increase
  memory and bursts of Path construction.
- Choose numerical performance thresholds from the baseline before declaring
  a performance improvement. Do not infer improvement from worker count alone.

If main-thread Path construction or text measurement dominates after offloading,
record that result. It is evidence for the later renderer work, not proof that
all vector processing has moved off the UI thread.


14. Decisions to resolve through the prototype

- Exact encoded vector source API and compatibility policy for decoded sources.
- How portable style definitions accompany public CompiledStyle values.
- Kotlin/JS worker versus Kotlin/Wasm worker for the browser implementation.
- Concrete thread executor APIs for supported non-browser targets.
- Buffer ownership and whether retaining raw tile bytes is worthwhile.
- Worker count, queue capacity and main-thread conversion budget.
- Failure/retry policy and whether an explicit local compatibility path is needed.
- Whether measurements justify persistent decoded-tile ownership in workers.

These are implementation decisions with testable tradeoffs. They do not require
adding all alternative backends or caches to the first implementation.


15. Prior discussion context

The October 3 canvas refactor discussion established single-owner engine state,
normalized source requests, per-canvas lifecycle isolation, explicit outcomes
and composition instead of specialized engine inheritance. Preserve the useful
behavior from those changes while replacing the multi-class orchestration.

The August 26-27 Graphite discussions exposed a different problem: compiling
targets did not establish that the intended backend worked in the existing demo.
Use actual runtime checks for this worker migration. Keep platform plumbing at
the execution boundary and use the existing remote vector demo as the primary
integration exercise.

Relevant T3 thread references:

  October canvas refactors:
  8738a23c-f75e-4647-b877-afd199078fd5

  Earlier stale-work discussion:
  f62257bf-3822-424d-b99c-2c1056c4b17e

  Graphite integration and follow-up:
  80548870-1c76-4bc5-9231-09077540f405
  b0d82aa4-7dda-4161-9788-7fc87964141a


16. Technical references

Consult the versions matching the project toolchain during implementation.
The architecture does not depend on browser dispatchers gaining thread support.

Kotlin coroutine JS dispatcher implementation:
https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.coroutines/blob/master/kotlinx-coroutines-core/js/src/CoroutineContext.kt

Kotlin coroutine Wasm JS dispatcher implementation:
https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.coroutines/blob/master/kotlinx-coroutines-core/wasmJs/src/CoroutineContext.kt

Kotlin dispatcher platform behavior:
https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines/-dispatchers/-default.html

Browser worker execution and messaging:
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Using_web_workers

Structured clone limits, including functions and object prototypes:
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Structured_clone_algorithm

Transferable buffers and sender detachment:
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Transferable_objects

Kotlin/Wasm JavaScript interop:
https://kotlinlang.org/docs/wasm-js-interop.html

Mapbox style semantics:
https://docs.mapbox.com/style-spec/

Vector tile format:
https://github.com/mapbox/vector-tile-spec
